content/blog/my-career-path-where-do-want-to-go/my-career-path-where-do-want-to-go.md, before:

---
date: "2023-01-17"
title: "My career path - where do I want to go?"
summary: ""
categories:
  - "Personal"
  - "Career"
---

Today I joined a community where senior developers discuss and coach each other into defining their career goals. Think of sharing experiences, help and motivate each other to reach their goals, and hold each other accountable.

When joining the community, you are asked to introduce yourself, tell what you've done, where you are now, and what your ambitions are.

I consider myself to be a senior developer, if only because of my age... 😏 But I also consider myself not being super ambitious. I am doing specific senior-like things both in my work and free time (more on that later), and have some loose ideas on what else I want to do and achieve, but I don't have a very clear goal which role I think I should have in 5 or 10 years from now. Many developers of my age aspire a C-level role.

> Today I learned that C-level means being a "chief", for example a CTO, CEO, etc.

But I do think I perhaps should be more aware and conscious of my career path, which is why I think it's good and interesting to join this community as a way to explore this.

I decided to write my introduction here, as a blog post, and then copy-paste it to the community as well, because I think it's to have on my own website as well:

---

Commit message:

wip draft introduction about me

content/blog/my-career-path-where-do-want-to-go/my-career-path-where-do-want-to-go.md, after:

---
date: "2023-01-17"
title: "My career path - where do I want to go?"
summary: ""
categories:
  - "Personal"
  - "Career"
---

Today I joined a community where senior developers discuss and coach each other into defining their career goals. Think of sharing experiences, help and motivate each other to reach their goals, and hold each other accountable.

When joining the community, you are asked to introduce yourself, tell what you've done, where you are now, and what your ambitions are.

I consider myself to be a senior developer, if only because of my age... 😏 But I also consider myself not being super ambitious. I am doing specific senior-like things both in my work and free time (more on that later), and have some loose ideas on what else I want to do and achieve, but I don't have a very clear goal which role I think I should have in 5 or 10 years from now. Many developers of my age aspire a C-level role, but I am not sure I do.

> Today I learned that C-level means being a "chief" of something, for example a CTO, CEO, etc.

But I do think I perhaps should be more aware and conscious of my career path, which is why I think it's good and interesting to join this community as a way to explore this.

I decided to write my introduction here, as a blog post, and then copy-paste it to the community as well, because I think it's to have on my own website as well:

---

Hi, I am Bouwe, 45 yo, from a small town in The Netherlands, where I live with my partner and two daughters. After finishing CS studies in 1999, fascinated by the web, I started working for a consultancy firm building custom made content management systems using HTML, CSS, and Active Server Pages. After that, I worked several years as a .NET C# software engineer, mainly building backends. Last year I joined WebinarGeek, where I am a frontend developer building an interactive video streaming app with React.

I consider myself being a communicative developer, I really enjoy working and interacting with people, and learning from each other. Learning is a keyword in my career. I keep on being fascinated learning ways to improve my skills, and learning new technologies.

Only after my 40s I accepted from myself that I know enough to share things I learned, and do active content creation. In fact, I now even have the courage to share things I am still learning, because by sharing what you learn, you learn faster and better. No need to wait until you are an expert.

For this year I plan on speaking at meetups or even conferences for the first time. Since I started content creation, I realized for me taking a leap of faith gives me a kick, and I want to see how far I can go.

In 2019 I started learning React in my free time, organized workshops so I could teach it to other people, and now found a job so I can do React fulltime. I also do blogging, live coding streams, and recently started a webcast with a fellow curious coder, which is called Curious Coders (of course).

So my career at the moment, and also in the near future, will be about building cool applications with nice people and the tech I love, and on the side do content creation, because that makes it really special being a developer in my opinion. And sometimes I think that's just who I am. Until now I've always changed jobs because I wanted to work with another technology.

On the other hand, if you would tell me 5 years ago I would be doing this now, I would not believed you. So that is why I think it's good and interesting to think about a next step, and if that would be something else than developing and content creation.

On one hand I feel I am not suitable and excited about softer roles such as PO, CTO, or whatever, but on the other hand why not, if you see what I am doing now, while I was always very quiet and shy in the past. So yeah, let's find out!
