src/pages/react.mdx, before:

import Page from '../templates/page';
export default Page

import { Link } from "gatsby";

# React.js

#### Introduction

I have committed myself to learning React.js. And not by just copy and pasting another one's code
and hoping it works, but by really learning the basics and the idea behind React. And the best way
to do that is by teaching it to others. I do that by blogging on this website and by giving workshops.

#### Blog posts

My React.js blog posts are filed under the <Link to="/categories/react">React category</Link> page.

#### Workshops

I am giving React beginner workshops, check the <Link to="/categories/workshops">Workshops blogs</Link>
for more information or contact me on <a href="https://twitter.com/bouwe">Twitter</a>.

#### Resources

Here is a list of links that I consider being essential for me (and maybe for you too!) to learn React. 
Many of the links I have watched or read many times, and I can keep on watching or reading them because 
every time I hear something new.

I will keep updating this list as it is a note to self in the first place.

##### People to follow
- [Dan Abramov]
- [Kent C. Dodds]
- [Ryan Florence]
- [Robin Wieruch]

[dan abramov]: https://overreacted.io
[kent c. dodds]: https://kentcdodds.com
[ryan florence]: https://ryanflorence.com
[robin wieruch]: https://www.robinwieruch.de

##### React Talks
- [React: Rethinking best practices] by [Pete Hunt]
- [Making the DOM declarative] by [Michael Jackson] (no, not [THAT] Michael Jackson)
- [Getting Closure on React Hooks] by [swyx]

[React: Rethinking best practices]: https://youtu.be/x7cQ3mrcKaY
[Pete Hunt]: https://twitter.com/floydophone
[Getting Closure on React Hooks]: https://youtu.be/KJP1E-Y-xyo
[swyx]: https://twitter.com/swyx
[Making the DOM declarative]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vyO5wKHlWZg
[Michael Jackson]: https://twitter.com/mjackson
[that]: https://michaeljackson.com

Commit message:

Renamed the title of the React Foundation blog post.

src/pages/react.mdx, after:

import Page from "../templates/page";
export default Page;

import { Link } from "gatsby";

# React.js

#### Introduction

I have committed myself to learning React.js. And not by just copy and pasting another one's code
and hoping it works, but by really learning the basics and the idea behind React. And the best way
to do that is by teaching it to others. I do that by blogging on this website and by giving workshops.

#### Blog posts

My React.js blog posts are filed under the <Link to="/categories/react">React category</Link> page.

#### Workshops

I am giving React workshops, check the <Link to="/categories/workshops">Workshops blogs</Link>
for more information or contact me on <a href="https://twitter.com/bouwe">Twitter</a>.

If you are Dutch, read my <Link to="/wat-je-leert-in-mijn-react-foundation-training">blog post about my React Foundation training</Link> I give.

#### Resources

Here is a list of links that I consider being essential for me (and maybe for you too!) to learn React.
Many of the links I have watched or read many times, and I can keep on watching or reading them because
every time I hear something new.

I will keep updating this list as it is a note to self in the first place.

##### People to follow

- [Dan Abramov]
- [Kent C. Dodds]
- [Ryan Florence]
- [Robin Wieruch]

[dan abramov]: https://overreacted.io
[kent c. dodds]: https://kentcdodds.com
[ryan florence]: https://ryanflorence.com
[robin wieruch]: https://www.robinwieruch.de

##### React Talks

- [React: Rethinking best practices] by [Pete Hunt]
- [Making the DOM declarative] by [Michael Jackson] (no, not [THAT] Michael Jackson)
- [Getting Closure on React Hooks] by [swyx]

[react: rethinking best practices]: https://youtu.be/x7cQ3mrcKaY
[pete hunt]: https://twitter.com/floydophone
[getting closure on react hooks]: https://youtu.be/KJP1E-Y-xyo
[swyx]: https://twitter.com/swyx
[making the dom declarative]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vyO5wKHlWZg
[michael jackson]: https://twitter.com/mjackson
[that]: https://michaeljackson.com
