content/blog/elm-rendering-html/elm-rendering-html.md, before:

---
date: "2022-12-05"
title: "Elm: Rendering HTML"
summary: ""
categories:
  - "Functional programming"
  - "Elm"
---

### Introduction

In my [previous blog post about Elm](/elm-baby-steps) I wrote about the Elm language, mainly about how to create and call functions. Because that's what you do in a functional language, writing and/or calling functions.

In this post I'll look into rendering HTML with Elm. This is very common, as Elm is a language for creating web applications. The Elm code you write is compiled into JavaScript.

Again, we will use the [Elm Playground](https://elm-lang.org/try) so you don't have to install anything, and we can just fiddle around.

In this blog post I'll focus on just _showing_ HTML. Adding user interaction will be something for a next article.

### Hello World

As I've already explained in [my previous Elm blog post](/elm-baby-steps), the following Elm program renders the text `"Hello World"` in the browser:

```
import Html exposing (text)

main = 
    text "Hello, World!"
```

If you inspect the page, you'll see the DOM (roughly) looks as this:

```
<html>
<body>
"Hello, World!"
</body>
</html>
```

Now you might think, let's add some HTML like this:

```
main =
    text "<div>Hello, <b>World!</b></div>"
```

However, now it (still) renders the value as text, so it does not apply the markup:

```
<html>
<body>
"<div>Hello, <b>World!</b></div>"
</body>
</html>
```

The reason for this is we still pass the `text` function to `main`. Its purpose is to add plain text to the DOM. It's the equivalent of rendering text content into an element, in this case in the `body` element.

So how do we write HTML that is rendered by the browser?

### HTML

Let's start with just rendering a `div` element with a text. Next to the `text` function we were already importing, we also import the `div` function:

```
import Html exposing (div, text)

main =
    div [] [ text "Hello, World!" ]
```

The value of `main` now becomes the `div` function which expects two list arguments. The first one are HTML attributes of the `div`, which are empty (`[]`) in this case. The second argument is a list of children of the `div`, in this case the `text` with the `"Hello, World!"` text content as an argument.

Next, let's try to achieve the HTML we want, with `"World!"` being bold:

```
import Html exposing (b, div, text)

main =
    div []
        [ text "Hello, "
        , b []
            [ text "World!"
            ]
        ]
```

In the second (children) array argument, `div` not only receives the `"Hello, "` text, but also another element function for a bold text, the `b` function we've imported from `Html`. The `b` element also has an empty list for its attributes, and a child for the `"World"` text.

> Note the indentation of the code, this is how you should indent Elm code. Personally I really have to get used to this, so for now I let my editor do the formatting, also because incorrect formatting gives compilation errors. You could use VS Code, or an online editor such as [Elm Editor](https://elm-editor.com) to do this for you.

### CSS styling

Until now we have not supplied any attributes to the `div` and `b` elements we've used, so let's do that now. Let's center the div and make the bold text red:

```
import Html exposing (b, div, text)
import Html.Attributes exposing (style)

main =
    div
        [ style "display" "grid"
        , style "place-items" "center"
        , style "min-height" "5vh"
        , style "background-color" "white"
        ]
        [ text "Hello, "
        , b
            [ style "color" "red"
            ]
            [ text "World!"
            ]
        ]
```

We import `style` from `Html.Attributes`, and pass it to both the `div` and `b` in the first argument, which is the attributes argument.

Of course you can also use CSS classes:

```
import Html exposing (b, div, text)
import Html.Attributes exposing (class)

main =
    div
        [ class "container"
        ]
        [ text "Hello, "
        , b
            [ class "emphasis"
            ]
            [ text "World!"
            ]
        ]
```

Just like with most frontend frameworks, Elm is not opinionated about CSS styling, so there are many more ways to do styling.

### Conclusion

Of course there is a lot more to say about HTML, but that's for another time. A very nice next step would be to discover how to make a web app interactive, so stay tuned!

Thanks for reading, and if you have questions or remarks, please let me know!

Commit message:

improve explanation DOM text nodes and elements [publish]

content/blog/elm-rendering-html/elm-rendering-html.md, after:

---
date: "2022-12-05"
title: "Elm: Rendering HTML"
summary: ""
categories:
  - "Functional programming"
  - "Elm"
---

### Introduction

In my [previous blog post about Elm](/elm-baby-steps) I wrote about the Elm language, mainly about how to create and call functions. Because that's what you do in a functional language, writing and/or calling functions.

In this post I'll look into rendering HTML with Elm. This is very common, as Elm is a language for creating web applications. The Elm code you write is compiled into JavaScript.

Again, we will use the [Elm Playground](https://elm-lang.org/try) so you don't have to install anything, and we can just fiddle around.

In this blog post I'll focus on just _showing_ HTML. Adding user interaction will be something for a next article.

### Hello World

As I've already explained in [my previous Elm blog post](/elm-baby-steps), the following Elm program renders the text `"Hello World"` in the browser:

```
import Html exposing (text)

main = 
    text "Hello, World!"
```

If you inspect the page, you'll see the DOM (roughly) looks as this:

```
<html>
<body>
"Hello, World!"
</body>
</html>
```

Now you might think, let's add some HTML like this:

```
main =
    text "<div>Hello, <b>World!</b></div>"
```

However, now it (still) renders the value as text, so it does not apply the markup:

```
<html>
<body>
"<div>Hello, <b>World!</b></div>"
</body>
</html>
```

The reason for this is we still pass the `text` function to `main`. Its purpose is to add plain text nodes to the DOM. However, text nodes aren't the only things you can add to the DOM, of course there are also elements.

So how do we write HTML that is rendered by the browser?

### HTML

Let's start with just rendering a `div` element with a text. Next to the `text` function we were already importing, we also import the `div` function:

```
import Html exposing (div, text)

main =
    div [] [ text "Hello, World!" ]
```

The value of `main` now becomes the `div` function which expects two list arguments. The first one are HTML attributes of the `div`, which are empty (`[]`) in this case. The second argument is a list of children of the `div`, in this case the `text` with the `"Hello, World!"` text content as an argument.

Next, let's try to achieve the HTML we want, with `"World!"` being bold:

```
import Html exposing (b, div, text)

main =
    div []
        [ text "Hello, "
        , b []
            [ text "World!"
            ]
        ]
```

In the second (children) array argument, `div` not only receives the `"Hello, "` text, but also another element function for a bold text, the `b` function we've imported from `Html`. The `b` element also has an empty list for its attributes, and a child for the `"World"` text.

> Note the indentation of the code, this is how you should indent Elm code. Personally I really have to get used to this, so for now I let my editor do the formatting, also because incorrect formatting gives compilation errors. You could use VS Code, or an online editor such as [Elm Editor](https://elm-editor.com) to do this for you.

### CSS styling

Until now we have not supplied any attributes to the `div` and `b` elements we've used, so let's do that now. Let's center the div and make the bold text red:

```
import Html exposing (b, div, text)
import Html.Attributes exposing (style)

main =
    div
        [ style "display" "grid"
        , style "place-items" "center"
        , style "min-height" "5vh"
        , style "background-color" "white"
        ]
        [ text "Hello, "
        , b
            [ style "color" "red"
            ]
            [ text "World!"
            ]
        ]
```

We import `style` from `Html.Attributes`, and pass it to both the `div` and `b` in the first argument, which is the attributes argument.

Of course you can also use CSS classes:

```
import Html exposing (b, div, text)
import Html.Attributes exposing (class)

main =
    div
        [ class "container"
        ]
        [ text "Hello, "
        , b
            [ class "emphasis"
            ]
            [ text "World!"
            ]
        ]
```

Just like with most frontend frameworks, Elm is not opinionated about CSS styling, so there are many more ways to do styling.

### Conclusion

Of course there is a lot more to say about HTML, but that's for another time. A very nice next step would be to discover how to make a web app interactive, so stay tuned!

Thanks for reading, and if you have questions or remarks, please let me know!
