content/pages/speaking.md, before:

---
title: "Speaking"
---

#### Introduction

From the moment I started learning React I also started teaching React to others by blogging and giving workshops and talks.

#### Blog posts

Blog posts about my workshops are filed under the [Workshops category].

#### Podcasts

I host 2 podcasts about coding, testing, architecture, content creation, career, etc.:

1. [Bouwe's Briefs](https://anchor.fm/bouwe77) is my own podcast, where I ramble, and try to keep it short.
2. [Curious Coders Chronicles](https://anchor.fm/curious-coder) is a podcast I host together with [Rich](https://richstone.io), where we, and our ocassional guests, talk about the things we are curious about.

#### Upcoming events

- Nov 24, 2023 Introduction to Elm @ WebinarGeek

#### Past events

- Oct 12, 2023 **Talk** The Wonders of Content Creation @ [Frontend Devs Groningen meetup](https://www.meetup.com/groningen-frontend-devs/events/296030439/)
- Jul 28, 2023 Demonstrating my side project [Temba] @ WebinarGeek
- Jan 27, 2023 A talk about a (possible) conference talk @ WebinarGeek
- Oct 21, 2022 My thoughts about Manual vs automated End-to-End testing @ WebinarGeek
- May 27, 2022 Demoing my side project [Holodeck] by creating MDX slides during the talk @ WebinarGeek
- Jan 28, 2022 My thoughts on expected and unexpected Errors @ WebinarGeek
- Nov 26, 2021 Intro to [REMIX] @ WebinarGeek
- Sep 24, 2021 Intro to [React Query] @ WebinarGeek
- Mar 5, 2021 React Foundation **workshop** (part 3) @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Feb 19, 2021 React Foundation **workshop** (part 2) @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Jan 29, 2021 React Foundation **workshop** (part 1) @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Sep 15, 2020 **Tech talk** [Live Coding a Game in React] @ KPN GroSkills
- Sep 11, 2020 **Tech talk** [Live Coding a Game in React] @ New Nexus Summer Bootcamp
- Sep 11, 2020 **Tech talk** [Power to the Client with GraphQL] @ New Nexus Summer Bootcamp
- Sep 11, 2020 **Talk** [Leren is delen, delen is leren] (Learning by Teaching) @ New Nexus Summer Bootcamp
- Feb 28, 2020 **Talk** on "Scrum for the Workplace" @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Feb 21, 2020 "Travelling Through Space with React"
  React beginner **workshop** @ Frontend Devs Groningen meetup
  [https://www.meetup.com/Groningen-Frontend-Devs/events/267685648/](https://www.meetup.com/Groningen-Frontend-Devs/events/267685648/)
- Feb 12, 2020 **Talk** on Code Reviews @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Feb 6, 2020 "Travelling Through Space with React"
  React beginner **workshop** @ KPN GroSkills
- Jan 20-24, 2020 React mentoring and **workshops** @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya
- Nov 26, 2019 React Hooks **training** @ New Nexus
- Nov 19, 2019 React Hooks **training** @ New Nexus
- Nov 14, 2019 **Tech Talk** on The useState Hook @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Jun 27, 2019 React beginner **workshop** @ New Nexus
- May 9, 2019 React beginner **workshop** @ New Nexus
- Mar 12, 2019 React beginner **workshop** @ New Nexus (private event)

#### Interested in a workshop or talk?

That would be awesome! 😃 Contact me on [Twitter]!

[holodeck]: https://github.com/bouwe77/holodeck
[live coding a game in react]: https://newnexus.nl/webinar/live-coding-a-game-in-react
[leren is delen, delen is leren]: https://newnexus.nl/webinar/leren-is-delen-delen-is-leren
[power to the client with graphql]: https://newnexus.nl/webinar/power-to-the-client-with-graphql
[workshops category]: /categories/workshops
[twitter]: https://twitter.com/bouwe
[react query]: https://react-query.tanstack.com
[remix]: https://remix.run
[temba]: https://github.com/bouwe77/temba#readme

Commit message:

add wonders of cc talk December [publish]

content/pages/speaking.md, after:

---
title: "Speaking"
---

#### Introduction

From the moment I started learning React I also started teaching React to others by blogging and giving workshops and talks.

#### Blog posts

Blog posts about my workshops are filed under the [Workshops category].

#### Podcasts

I host 2 podcasts about coding, testing, architecture, content creation, career, etc.:

1. [Bouwe's Briefs](https://anchor.fm/bouwe77) is my own podcast, where I ramble, and try to keep it short.
2. [Curious Coders Chronicles](https://anchor.fm/curious-coder) is a podcast I host together with [Rich](https://richstone.io), where we, and our ocassional guests, talk about the things we are curious about.

#### Upcoming events

- Nov 24, 2023 Introduction to Elm @ WebinarGeek
- Dec 7, 2023 **Talk** The Wonders of Content Creation @ New Nexus meetup

#### Past events

- Oct 12, 2023 **Talk** The Wonders of Content Creation @ [Frontend Devs Groningen meetup](https://www.meetup.com/groningen-frontend-devs/events/296030439/)
- Jul 28, 2023 Demonstrating my side project [Temba] @ WebinarGeek
- Jan 27, 2023 A talk about a (possible) conference talk @ WebinarGeek
- Oct 21, 2022 My thoughts about Manual vs automated End-to-End testing @ WebinarGeek
- May 27, 2022 Demoing my side project [Holodeck] by creating MDX slides during the talk @ WebinarGeek
- Jan 28, 2022 My thoughts on expected and unexpected Errors @ WebinarGeek
- Nov 26, 2021 Intro to [REMIX] @ WebinarGeek
- Sep 24, 2021 Intro to [React Query] @ WebinarGeek
- Mar 5, 2021 React Foundation **workshop** (part 3) @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Feb 19, 2021 React Foundation **workshop** (part 2) @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Jan 29, 2021 React Foundation **workshop** (part 1) @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Sep 15, 2020 **Tech talk** [Live Coding a Game in React] @ KPN GroSkills
- Sep 11, 2020 **Tech talk** [Live Coding a Game in React] @ New Nexus Summer Bootcamp
- Sep 11, 2020 **Tech talk** [Power to the Client with GraphQL] @ New Nexus Summer Bootcamp
- Sep 11, 2020 **Talk** [Leren is delen, delen is leren] (Learning by Teaching) @ New Nexus Summer Bootcamp
- Feb 28, 2020 **Talk** on "Scrum for the Workplace" @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Feb 21, 2020 "Travelling Through Space with React"
  React beginner **workshop** @ Frontend Devs Groningen meetup
  [https://www.meetup.com/Groningen-Frontend-Devs/events/267685648/](https://www.meetup.com/Groningen-Frontend-Devs/events/267685648/)
- Feb 12, 2020 **Talk** on Code Reviews @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Feb 6, 2020 "Travelling Through Space with React"
  React beginner **workshop** @ KPN GroSkills
- Jan 20-24, 2020 React mentoring and **workshops** @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya
- Nov 26, 2019 React Hooks **training** @ New Nexus
- Nov 19, 2019 React Hooks **training** @ New Nexus
- Nov 14, 2019 **Tech Talk** on The useState Hook @ LakeHub Academy, Kenya (remote)
- Jun 27, 2019 React beginner **workshop** @ New Nexus
- May 9, 2019 React beginner **workshop** @ New Nexus
- Mar 12, 2019 React beginner **workshop** @ New Nexus (private event)

#### Interested in a workshop or talk?

That would be awesome! 😃 Contact me on [Twitter]!

[holodeck]: https://github.com/bouwe77/holodeck
[live coding a game in react]: https://newnexus.nl/webinar/live-coding-a-game-in-react
[leren is delen, delen is leren]: https://newnexus.nl/webinar/leren-is-delen-delen-is-leren
[power to the client with graphql]: https://newnexus.nl/webinar/power-to-the-client-with-graphql
[workshops category]: /categories/workshops
[twitter]: https://twitter.com/bouwe
[react query]: https://react-query.tanstack.com
[remix]: https://remix.run
[temba]: https://github.com/bouwe77/temba#readme
